Telangana State Board Mathematics AI Tutor — Project Report
1. Overview

This project implements an AI-powered mathematics tutor for Grades 8–10 following the Telangana State Board syllabus. The goal is to provide step-by-step explanations, concept-based guidance, and mistake feedback while keeping grading rule-based and deterministic.

The tutor uses Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) to connect student questions to relevant curriculum concepts and generate explanations using a hosted AI model.

2. Roadmap
November 2025

Planned project scope and identified key grades (8–10) and chapters.

Created folder structure for backend, frontend, and curriculum JSON.

December 2025

Began embedding chapters into concept chunks for RAG pipeline.

Wrote rule-based validation functions for basic answer correctness.

Integrated Supabase vector database for storing concept embeddings.

January 2026

Built FastAPI backend with /check-answer endpoint.

Connected frontend HTML page with dropdowns, input box, and submission button.

Implemented AI explanation generation using a free hosted LLM via Hugging Face.

Tested multiple sample requests for different chapters and grades.

Note: Project development was paused during board exam preparation.

3. Limitations

AI Limitations:

AI only explains concepts, does not determine correctness.

Explanations depend on the hosted model; free-tier models have size and speed constraints.

Curriculum Coverage:

Only covers Telangana State Board syllabus for Grades 8–10.

Advanced concepts (like logarithms or calculus) are not included.

Deployment Constraints:

Local execution may require significant RAM for embeddings if not using hosted solutions.

Free-tier API models may occasionally time out or produce incomplete responses.

4. Design Decisions

RAG Pipeline:

Separation of deterministic grading and AI explanation.

Retrieval of top-K relevant concepts ensures AI explanations stay curriculum-aligned.

Backend Stack:

Python + FastAPI for RESTful endpoints.

Supabase Vector DB for concept storage and retrieval.

Frontend Stack:

Simple HTML + JavaScript page for input and output.

Focused on functionality over design for rapid integration and testing.

Versioning and Examples:

Curriculum JSON stored chapter-wise.

Example requests provided in examples/ folder to demonstrate API usage.

5. Architecture
Components

Frontend

Collects student questions and answers.

Displays correctness, explanation, and mistake feedback.

Backend (FastAPI)

/check-answer endpoint validates answers, retrieves concepts, and generates AI explanations.

Vector Database (Supabase)

Stores embeddings of curriculum concepts.

Supports Top-K similarity search to find the most relevant concepts for each student question.

AI / LLM Component

Hosted small LLM generates explanations using retrieved concepts.

Does not grade correctness.

Data Flow
Student Question
       ↓
Frontend sends request to FastAPI /check-answer
       ↓
Backend validates answer using deterministic rules
       ↓
Query Supabase for chapter concept embeddings
       ↓
Top-K relevant concepts retrieved
       ↓
AI generates step-by-step explanation
       ↓
Backend responds with JSON:
    - correct: True/False
    - explanation: Generated text
    - mistake: Optional feedback
       ↓
Frontend displays results

6. Key Challenges

Integrating AI explanations while keeping grading deterministic.

Handling vector embeddings and retrieval with a lightweight hosted database.

Aligning explanations strictly with syllabus-approved methods, avoiding shortcuts or advanced topics.

Limited local hardware resources for testing embeddings and LLM inference.

7. Sample Request / Response

Request:

{
  "grade": 9,
  "chapter": "Polynomials",
  "question": "Factorize x^2 + 5x + 6",
  "student_answer": "x^2 + 5x + 6",
  "correct_answer": "(x+2)(x+3)",
  "expected_type": "polynomial"
}


Response:

{
  "correct": false,
  "explanation": "The correct factorization of x^2 + 5x + 6 is (x+2)(x+3). The student’s answer shows the original polynomial without factorization. Factoring requires splitting the middle term or finding numbers that multiply to 6 and add to 5.",
  "mistake": "Polynomial terms or signs are incorrect"
}

8. Conclusion

This initiative demonstrates the integration of rule-based correctness, curriculum-aligned concepts, and AI-generated explanations. Despite resource limitations and exam-related pauses, the project successfully provides a foundation for a fully interactive AI tutor for Telangana State Board mathematics.

The project also highlights leadership in design decisions, problem-solving, and structured implementation, making it suitable for showcasing initiative in academic applications.
